got an interesting question by email
from a viewer who was asking my advice
about his own changes in career and
education and the questions are to some
extent pragmatic but to some extent also
they are philosophical so I'm gonna
leave out the personal details of this
guy his name is Christopher hi Chris and
toward the end of his message he
reflects that in considering these
different disciplines of study these
different career paths in front of him
quote I had it in my mind that I should
achieve something to try to help people
but I feel like this may be more
motivated by conceit by the desire to
feel like I'm influential and important
and that I matter rather than by real
goodwill towards other beings and by
real goodness so close quote a very
interesting set of considerations
generally I want to say with absolutely
no cynicism that when I talk to other
vegans the question of how you're gonna
earn a living in this world the question
are you gonna earn money he's really
interesting to me I think it's a really
interesting type of conversation when I
was writing email recently to another
vegan who I know on YouTube I had a sort
of disclaimer saying look I know
everyone asks you what do you do for a
living it's sort of it's some old chat
it's a banal type of conversation it's
so common but I'm asking this really not
in a banal way I'm really interested and
I think it's they're really interesting
ethical questions surrounding employment
surrounding career paths for vegans that
other people don't think about or maybe
are too sensitive to you know I am a
vegan but before I became vegan I had
already quit jobs over a point of moral
principle because that's the kind of guy
I was I was also strictly vegetarian I'm
saying before I was vegan but I already
refused to wear a leather thing so it's
pretty close to being back then but in
general I mean it's hard to generalize
about vegans were a diverse bunch of
people with with very different issues
and values but certainly the core
ethical concerns of veganism lend
themselves to some philosophizing about
how a person is going to make money and
in this case also what does it mean to
try to help people what is
humanitarian engagement of motivation
and in this case how is that different
from this kind of conceit
now I'm an overt nihilist I may be a
highly ethical nihilist but my own
values I describe as historical nihilism
what I think is valuable in this world
and what can make a pause the difference
is not based on belief but on very
pragmatic down-to-earth concerns and
that guided my engagement with ecology
with politics now with veganism and so
on also he asks here without quoting him
directly how does this kind of conceit
differ from really caring about helping
people I think one of the first things
you have to realize the philosopher max
Stirner wrote about this at length but
unfortunately you have to read sterner
and German because the English
translation is terrible one of the
challenges in life is moving past the
sort of popular delusion of talking
about the people in German it's that's
Foulke and to really think about people
not in the abstract but in the concrete
so this question of motivation if we're
talking about Laos starting with doing
humanitarian work in Laos I can tell you
how I feel about Lao culture about Lao
people in general about particular Lao
people I've known about the Lao language
and then about ethnic minorities within
Laos because a lot of the humanitarian
work is to help smaller ethnic groups
that are even more poverty-stricken even
more disadvantaged than regular Lao
people within that country and I can
reflect on the extent to which my
humanitarian engagement we're talking
about the future here not the past may
or may not reflect real feelings of
goodwill toward the Lao people now why
is that
look I drink zero alcohol laos has one
of the hardest drinking cultures in the
world this is just one example of how
i'm dramatically different from Lao
culture
I've lived in Scotland and I've lived in
Laos they drink more whiskey in Laos
it's my honest opinion it is a
hard-drinking called
and they drink Scottish whiskey too
actually it's good to allow wedding one
of the most common gifts is bottles of
scotch whiskey there are many many
obvious ways in which my values are
incompatible with Lao culture and just
with the reality of daily life in Laos
getting a good night's sleep is very
important to me despite the fact that I
look incredibly exhausted now I'm
jet-lagged I woke up at 5:30 a.m. I have
all kinds of complaints with that in
Laos you're in a country we are
surrounded by barking dogs and roosters
crowing at all hours animal husbandry
different kinds getting a decent night's
sleep is incredibly tough anywhere in
the country unless you live in a solid
concrete box with no windows and even
then barking dogs can get through
concrete there are many ways in which I
might be able to say I have contempt for
Laos or I dislike Lao culture and does
this contradict the humanitarian impulse
well for me I see the Lao people and the
past tense I saw the Lao people as in
many ways victims of circumstances that
other countries created for them and
incredibly violent history you know
they're on the list of countries that
have had the most bombs dropped on them
of any country in the world definitely
the United States dropped more bombs on
Laos then ever were dropped on Germany
during World War two an enormous tonnage
of bombardment dropped in the country
terrible suffering for reasons beyond
their control and they're struggling
with backwardness just lack of access to
education lack of literacy all kinds of
things that make me feel that I'm in a
position to help them and also make me
feel that many of the problems with that
culture are not their own fault now
maybe that is a kind of humanitarian
delusion I use the word feel a whole
bunch of times there I didn't use the
word no um to feel something is very
different from to know something and I
met people in Laos and even more in
Cambodia who had first gone to those
countries with this type of humanitarian
impulse they learned the language they
stay there for a few years and they
started off
these people need my help these people
deserve my help because their problems
are not of their own creation and they
need assistance and after some number of
years they turn a corner in terms of
their own cynicism and they feel like
[ __ ] these people they're the creators
of their own problems I hate these
people it's their problem they created
the mess they should get themselves at
and they may still be employed six days
a week in humanitarian work and as as
Chris is asking here and they may not be
motivated by real goodwill towards these
people they may have lost their goodwill
the goodwill they had before may have
evaporated in the face of various facts
if in the face of how they how they feel
about the culture I mean definitely
Cambodia the rough and tumble of that
culture I met many people I may be an
example myself by the end of my time in
Cambodia I never wanted to go back to
Cambodia there are many many things I
really dislike about Cambodian culture
and if you're talking about sacrificing
your own time effort and money to help
people you know again the crucial thing
is to think about who are the people not
as an abstraction but to think about
real people if you did humanitarian work
helping drug addicts here in Canada do
you have it in you to care about them to
respect them to really help them you
need to be engaged with the
all-too-human reality of who these
people are whether there are alcoholics
or drug addicts or or just ignorant
farmers I mean cut in Laos I mean you
had problems with people literally
drinking paint thinner because they felt
it made they made certain types of juice
taste better you know total ignorance
you had problems in Cambodia with people
poisoning themselves in others using
using pesticides improperly but the
labels on the pesticides would only be
written in English and Chinese they
can't read them whether or not they're
actually literate in any language
literate and Cambodian or anything else
anyway is another question
you know ignorant sit self ignorance is
destructive and dangerous and ugly and
can you still have goodwill towards
people people who may put you in harm's
way people who may put your life in
danger and may whatever destroy things
you care about out of their ignorance uh
I mean I almost feel like I can say
humanitarian work or humanitarian path
in life if it's based on goodwill
towards people maybe doomed to failure
most of this discourse I'm in the last
hundred years it's been dominated by
Christianity most of the charities that
helped drug addicts help the homeless or
what have you more Christian charities
and most of these conversations and
philosophical reflections took place
within a totally Christian idiom of
trying to love and care for the poor in
these things and you know this is
instead obviously in this generation
more and more people are asking these
questions in a secular way in my case in
a in a totally atheistic nihilistic way
and although as bad as Christianity is a
dislike many things but Christianity
obviously it created a cultural
framework that massively simplified
these questions when people engaged in
them you know the same way that
nationalism simplified questions by just
saying your motivation is to do this for
king and country religion often has the
effect of massively simplifying what
you're doing and why you're doing it by
simply saying it's it's for God it's not
even for the greater good it's not even
to benefit particular people now the
other problem is here so the first big
issue I raised was how we think of the
people and then this question of of real
goodness of real goodwill towards people
we need to re-evaluate in terms of how
you actually feel about actual people or
actual groups of people it's other
concern is of whether or not
his engagement it's not really clear to
me exactly what type of work he's
thinking about doing whether it's pure
charity work work involving languages
but his his ideas of helping humanity
one way or another through one
discipline or career another he's
concerned that is really motivated by
conceit by a desire to feel important um
I am very critical of various flaws in
my character but that is not one of them
and I've got to say I had a lot of
experience discussing these issues with
my girlfriends in life girlfriends who
have come and gone because I think some
of them couldn't really understand what
motivated me
I remember one girlfriend I had she was
also Canadian she felt that the reason
for this was that people had always
treated me as important anyway that was
her interpretation of my character
they're just kind of when I walk into a
room people would listen to me people
would treat me with a certain kind of
respect just because of my
self-confidence and manner of speaking
that was her interpretation and I
understand her reasons for thinking that
she had her experience with me being my
girlfriend and whatever obviously she's
a biased a biased observer of of who I
am what my life is like but I can
remember long periods my life where I
was I was not treated with respect and
how I felt about it and where people
regarded me as a person of no account
and no significance in different
contexts and so on and I've got to say
for me that was never the motivating
factor I was really interested in
poverty as poverty you know we have the
saying in English about you know art art
for art's sake I was really interested
in poverty for the sake of poverty when
I first enrolled in university it's a
much younger and more naive man the
subject I enrolled in was actually
economics so year one week one of my
first VA diploma I thought I would study
economics because I wanted to study the
philosophy of poverty I wanted to be
engaged with poverty and how we cope
with poverty not just charities
government policy everything else and I
was dis
pointed it was a crushing disappointment
to me that I was in a department that
was only about making money it was only
about getting ranch and all the students
were there for that reason and what was
being taught God at that time you know
day trading was a big deal people making
money through day trading managing hedge
funds these were the aspirations of the
students and these were the things the
program was supposed to train you at
least these types of careers there was
absolutely nothing about poverty was
that my idea of economics what not my
idea of what economics is but why I
cared about economics that was not going
to be covered in that university program
at all and in many ways for the next
four years that was a disappointment I
never recovered from I went from one
department to another and one discipline
to another looking for what I couldn't
find in the department of economics and
I ended up at the very very end of
studying Buddhism in a lot of ways you
can say that when I was studying
Buddhism I was trying to get back to my
reasons for being in university in the
first place because what excited me so
much about Buddhism was exactly this is
tarah battable ism was WOW Sri Lanka was
then in civil war it's now post war
Cambodia long civil war then just
recently post war all of these were
countries emerging from post war extreme
poverty and being engaged with Buddhism
and the languages of Southeast Asia
gave me a way to meaningfully connect to
these cultures and contexts and so on in
that period of history so I wanted to
have the experience in Laos that I did
have of living in a hut made out of
bamboo on the side of the Mekong River
and waking up in the morning and
chopping firewood and then you light the
firewood on fire and you have to boil
the drinking water you're gonna drink
and I would eat white rice and yellow
lentils and vitamin pill and being
engaged with the reality of Agriculture
and poverty and the that kind of that
kind of hands-on suffering
I don't know what to say I mean an
interest in poverty also guided my
engagement with Buddhism you know in a
massive way and I can't even say in a
profound way it's it's shallow
you know I grew up in Toronto Canada for
the most part mmm I was always
interested in poverty within Canada
particularly First Nations poverty when
I came back to Canada I want to be
engaged in that but none of that for me
subjectively none of that was me wanting
to feel important now if you know
anything about what goes on in academic
Buddhism already this made me profoundly
alien to pretty much the whole scene
there's a lot of escapism there are a
lot of white people living in luxury in
California and making money through
meditation retreats who want to keep on
living in luxury in California and have
absolutely no interest in poverty or the
emergence of poverty and in Cambodia in
Southeast Asia
how do we choose what we study in
university the real answer for me was
that I was running away from one lousy
department after another I was trying to
take the least terrible option I wasn't
doing what I wanted to do and that is
still true today I'm still coping with
lousy courses lousy departments lousy
options and not at all being able to do
what I want to do neither in terms of
immediate research nor in terms of long
term career so the disappointment I had
with the Department of Economics at one
University I've had a much worse
disappointment here with the department
teaching Chinese really crushing and I
had to take that complaint to the Dean
and there was a whole controversy over
the fact that basically the teaching of
Chinese at UVic is garbage and now
that's gonna have tremendously long-term
consequences for me in my life and my
career options I came here to study
Chinese and now I'm not studying Chinese
so the question really of what you can
study sadly is going to be based on a
completely pragmatic evaluation of
what's taught your University what you
can succeed at and what departments
happen to be well organized happen to
have competent professors and even how
those professors feel about you
because you know look I mean I have a
certain interest in poverty as already
described but if I go to apartment if I
go to a department in a university where
everyone's a Marxist or a communist then
right away I've got a conflict with them
and they may all despise me and if you
think that's only a hypothetical example
it's not there were a lot of people in
academia who are on the far left and I
have myself had contact with many
different departments that were
predominantly communist or far left-wing
again Buddhism was a way to avoid that
Buddhism was a non socialist
non-communist philosophy that for me was
engaged with politics and poverty and
all these other things so that boils to
probably absolutely zero practical
advice for Christopher here but a set of
reflections in response to his his
message he asked also specifically about
the study of languages maybe I should
make separate videos talking about that